# The Groups of Order Sixteen Made Easy

**Marcel Wild**

## 1. INTRODUCTION. 



There are many introductory texts on group theory that, in particular, classify all groups of order at most fifteen. What about order sixteen? Well,
there are fourteen of them, and they do of course make their appearance in higher level
texts such as [1] or [7]. However, to the author's best knowledge, the classification of
the groups of order sixteen is always obtained as a special case of a sophisticated theory
of p-groups, and many details are left to the reader to verify. This is annoying since
it, for example, obstructs the teaching of an advanced undergraduate course devoted to
the classification of all groups of order no larger than 23 or even 31.
Here we give a complete classification of the groups of order sixteen that is based on
elementary facts. More specifically, we look at extensions of order eight groups N by
C2, the cyclic group of order two. A crucial role is played by Lemma 2, which allows us
to discard three of the five groups of order eight. We also deal a lot with automorphisms
of groups. In this article no Sylow-theory, no theory of p-groups, no relatively free
groups (generators and relations), no group actions, not even the structure of finite
Abelian groups will be invoked. The most "difficult" prerequisite we take for granted
is Fact 5 about conjugacy classes and centralizers. Semidirect products appear as an
additional means to describe the fourteen groups of order sixteen. Yet no knowledge
of semidirect products is required; they do not appear in the proofs.

## 2. PRELIMINARIES AND STATEMENT OF THE MAIN THEOREM. 
We review some basic concepts and facts for later use. The proofs can be found in most introductory books such as [8] or lower level texts. A bijective homomorphism φ : G →H
of groups is an isomorphism; if H = G it is an automorphism. We write G ≃H if
there is an isomorphism φ : G →H, write H <=G if H is a subgroup of G, and
use H ◁G to signify that H is a normal subgroup of G. For any subsets X and Y
of G we put XY = {xy : x ∈X, y ∈Y}. If G is generated by x, y, . . . , z, we write
G = ⟨x, y, . . . , z⟩. In particular, when G = ⟨x⟩then G is cyclic. The order of G is its
cardinality |G|, and o(x) is the order of ⟨x⟩. We let Cn = {e, x, x2, . . . , xn-1} be the
cyclic group of order n.
Fact 1. If H1 and H2 are subgroups of G such that H1 ∩H2 = {e} and xy = yx for
all x in H1 and y in H2, then H1H2 is a subgroup isomorphic to the direct product
H1 × H2.
Fact 2. If o(x) <=2 for each x in G, then G is Abelian. If in addition |G| < ∞, then
G ≃C2 × C2 × · · · × C2.
Indeed, for all x and y in G one has (xy)(xy) = e and (xy)(yx) = xy2x = x2 = e.
Cancelling xy on the left gives xy = yx. Using Fact 1, commutativity, and induction
on |G| it is straightforward to see that G ≃C2 × · · · × C2 in the finite case. In particular |G| = 4 implies that G ≃C4 or G ≃C2 × C2. We write K4 for the Klein four
group C2 × C2.
The set Aut(G) of all automorphisms of a group G is a group under composition
of mappings. Each φ in Aut(G) is determined by its values on any set of generators of G. If C4 = ⟨x⟩, then Aut(C4) = {ϕ1, ϕ2}, and if C8 = ⟨x⟩, then Aut(C8) =
{φ1, φ2, φ3, φ4}, where the mappings are described in Fact 3:
Fact 3.
```
Aut(C4)
effect on x
ϕ1        x
ϕ2        x3 = x-1

Aut(C8) ≃ K4
effect on x
φ1        x
φ2        x3
φ3        x5
φ4        x7 = x-1
```
All nonidentity elements of Aut(C8) have order two. For instance,
(φ3 ◦φ3)(x) = φ3(φ3(x)) = φ3(x5) = (φ3(x))5 = (x5)5 = x25 = x.
For notational convenience we view the direct product of C4 = ⟨x⟩and C2 = ⟨y⟩
as {e, x, x2, x3, y, xy, x2y, x3y}. With this convention (x2y)(x3y) = x2x3yy = x is
computed "component-wise," as if we had ordered pairs (x2, y) and (x3, y). Because
this group will appear frequently in this article we christen it K8, which is nicer than
C4 × C2. Since each ψ in Aut(K8) has ψ(x) of order four, ψ(y) of order two, and
ψ(y) ∉⟨ψ(x)⟩, there can be at most eight automorphisms; namely, those indicated by
Fact 4:
Fact 4. Aut(K8) ≃ D8
```
effect on x   effect on y
ψ1  x         y
ψ2  x3y       x2y
ψ3  x3        y
ψ4  xy        x2y
ψ5  xy        y
ψ6  x3        x2y
ψ7  x3y       y
ψ8  x         x2y
```
We omit the proof that each partial map ψi listed here actually extends to an automorphism. This would be an easy application of relatively free groups, which we chose to
ignore in this article.
Let G again be arbitrary. Each a in G yields the inner automorphism ta of G defined
by ta(x) = axa-1. Elements v and w of G are automorphic if there is an automorphism
of G mapping v to w. They are conjugate if there is an inner automorphism of G mapping v to w. Being conjugate is an equivalence relation in every group. For instance y
and x2y from K8 are automorphic but not conjugate (all conjugacy classes of Abelian
groups are singletons). We call a member v of G characteristic if it is fixed by all
automorphisms. For example, in K8 the element x2 is characteristic as can be seen
from Fact 4. For v in G its centralizer C(v) := {w ∈G : wv = vw} is a subgroup of
G, and the center Z(G) := {w ∈G : wv = vw for all v in G} is a normal subgroup
of G. If class(v) denotes the conjugacy class of v in G, then we record:
Fact 5. | class(v)| · |C(v)| = |G|.
Let p be a prime. If |G| = pn and v belongs to G, then Fact 5 implies that
| class(v)| = pi with i >=0. Because G is partitioned by its conjugacy classes and
because Z(G) is the union of all singleton classes, we infer:

Fact 6. If |G| = pn for a prime p, then p divides |Z(G)|.
We state for the record the classification of groups of order eight.
Theorem 1. There are up to isomorphism exactly five groups of order eight. Besides
C2 × C2 × C2 they include the following:
K8
(C4, 2, ϕ1, e),
(C4, 2, ϕ1, x2)
D8
(C4, 2, ϕ2, e)
C8
(C4, 2, ϕ1, x),
(C4, 2, ϕ1, x3)
Q8
(C4, 2, ϕ2, x2)
Every reader with a passing interest in groups has come across these chaps. In particular D8 is the dihedral group of symmetries of the square, and Q8 = {±1, ±i, ± j, ±k}
is the quaternion group with i2 = j2 = k2 = -1, i · j = k, j · i = -k, etc. Written
next to the groups for reference are their extension types, which will be defined in the
next section.
Here is the paper's main theorem, whose proof will be divided into three lemmas.
Theorem 2. There are up to isomorphism exactly fourteen groups of order sixteen.
Besides the outsider G0 = C2 × C2 × C2 × C2 they can be listed as follows:
G1 = C8 × C2
(C8, 2, φ1, e)
16/2
G2 = SD16 = C8
3⋊C2
(C8, 2, φ2, e)
16/13
G3 = C8
5⋊C2
(C8, 2, φ3, e)
16/11
G4 = D16 = C8
7⋊C2
(C8, 2, φ4, e)
16/12
G5 = Q16
(C8, 2, φ4, x4)
16/14
G6 = C16
(C8, 2, φ1, x)
16/1
G7 = K4 × C4
(K8, 2, ψ1, e)
16/4
G8 = D8 × C2
(K8, 2, ψ3, e)
16/6
G9 = K4 ⋊C4
(K8, 2, ψ5, e)
16/9
G10 = Q8
τ⋊C2
(K8, 2, ψ6, e)
16/8
G11 = Q8 × C2
(K8, 2, ψ3, x2)
16/7
G12 = C4 ⋊C4
(K8, 2, ψ5, x2)
16/10
G13 = C4 × C4
(K8, 2, ψ1, y)
16/3

## 3. CYCLIC EXTENSIONS. 
Let N ◁G and N ′ ◁G′. It is well known that from
N ≃N ′ and G/N ≃G′/N ′ it does not follow that G ≃G′. However, in the case of
cyclic factor groups things are not too bad. Namely, suppose that G/N ≃Cn. (Such a
group G is called an (inner) cyclic extension of N.) Pick any a in G such that the coset
Na has order n in G/N. Then v = an is in N, and n is minimal with that property.
Further, let τ in Aut(N) be the restriction of ta to N. Then
τ(v) = aana-1 = an = v
(1)
and
τ n(x) = a · · · a(axa-1)a-1 · · · a-1 = anxa-n = vxv-1 = tv(x)

for all x in N, so
τ n = tv.
(2)
In particular, when N is Abelian
τ n = id .
(3)
The foregoing discussion motivates the following material.
Definition 1. A quadruple (N, n, τ, v) is an extension type if N is a group and if v in
N and τ in Aut(N) are such that τ(v) = v and τ n = tv.
Observe that this definition does not appeal to an element a anymore; in fact no
enveloping group G of N is even mentioned. However, starting out with a group G
having a factor group G/N ≃Cn it is clear from (1) and (2) that G realizes (obvious definition) at least one extension type (N, n, τ, v). Perhaps it realizes several
(N, n, σ, w) by varying the inducing element a. The multiplication in G is pinned
down by each fixed realized extension type (N, n, τ, v) as follows. Using the fact that
each element g of G can be written in normal form as g = xai with unique x in N and
i in {0, 1, . . . , n -1}, one has
(xai)(ya j) = x(ai ya-i)aia j = xτ i(y)ai+ j =
{
(xτ i(y))ai+ j     if i + j < n,
(xτ i(y)v)ai+ j-n   if i + j >=n.
(4)
Definition 2. The extension types (N, n, τ, v) and (N ′, n, σ, w) are equivalent if there
is an isomorphism ϕ : N ∼→ N ′ such that σ = ϕ ◦τ ◦ϕ-1 and w = ϕ(v).
One verifies that this is indeed an equivalence relation. For instance, the two extension types written to the right of C8 in Theorem 1 are equivalent---choose ϕ := ϕ2.
Let (N, n, τ, v) be an extension type, and let ϕ : N ∼→ N ′ be any isomorphism. Using
(ϕ ◦τ ◦ϕ-1)n = ϕ ◦τ n ◦ϕ-1 one checks that (N ′, n, ϕ ◦τ ◦ϕ-1, ϕ(v)) is an extension type as well and is equivalent to (N, n, τ, v) by definition. In particular, if G realizes some extension type and if G′ ≃G, then G′ realizes an equivalent extension type:
just take ϕ to be the restriction to N of an isomorphism Φ: G ∼→ G′. The converse is
more interesting and is stated in Lemma 1(a).
Lemma 1.
(a) Groups G and G′ that realize equivalent extension types must be isomorphic.
(b) Let v and w be automorphic elements of N, and let S be a fixed union of
conjugacy classes of Aut(N). Suppose for τ ranging over S there is a group
Gτ (respectively, Fτ) that realizes the extension type (N, n, τ, v) (respectively,
(N, n, τ, w)). Then the families {Gτ | τ ∈S} and {Fτ | τ ∈S} comprise the
same isomorphism types.
(c) Let v in N be characteristic, and let S be a conjugacy class of Aut(N). For any
σ and τ in S any two groups G and G′ realizing the extension types (N, n, σ, v)
and (N, n, τ, v), respectively, are isomorphic.

Proof.
(a) Let G and G′ realize (N, n, τ, v) (respectively, (N ′, n, σ, w)), where σ = ϕ ◦
τ ◦ϕ-1 and w = ϕ(v) for some isomorphism ϕ : N ∼→ N ′. By definition there
are elements a in G \ N and b in G′ \ N ′ such that conjugation with them
yields τ and σ, respectively, and such that an = v and bn = w. The map Φ from G to G′ that assigns xai to ϕ(x)bi is well defined and bijective. In order
to show that Φ is a homomorphism suppose that i + j >=n (the case i + j < n
is analogous). One computes

Φ((xai)(ya j)) = Φ(x(ai ya-i)ai+j) = Φ(xτ i(y)v ai+j-n) = ϕ(xτ i(y)v) bi+j-n = ϕ(x) ϕ(τ i(y)) ϕ(v) bi+j-n.

This is the same as

Φ(xai)Φ(ya j) = ϕ(x)bi ϕ(y)bj = ϕ(x)(bi ϕ(y) b-i) bi+j = ϕ(x) σ i(ϕ(y)) w bi+j-n,
since σ i = ϕ ◦τ i ◦ϕ-1 implies that σ i ◦ϕ = ϕ ◦τ i.
(b) Pick ϕ from Aut(N) with ϕ(v) = w. Obviously the correspondence given
by τ ↦→σ = ϕ ◦τ ◦ϕ-1 is a bijection of S. Because the extension types
(N, n, τ, v) and (N, n, σ, w) are equivalent, corresponding realizing groups
Gτ and Fσ must be isomorphic by (a).
(c) Let τ in S be fixed. As φ runs through Aut(N), φ ◦τ ◦φ-1 runs through S.
By (a) all groups of extension type (N, n, φ ◦τ ◦φ-1, φ(v)) are isomorphic.
But φ(v) = v for all φ since v is characteristic.
Let G be a group of order eight. If all elements of G have order at most two,
then G ≃C2 × C2 × C2 = (C2)3 by Fact 2. If G ≄ (C2)3, there is some x in G with
⟨x⟩= C4 (Why?). Since subgroups of index two are always normal one has C4 ◁G.
Since |C4| · | Aut(C4)| = 8 by Fact 3, there can be at most eight extension types
(C4, 2, ϕi, x j); in fact there are exactly six because x and x3 are not fixed by ϕ2. These
extension types are listed in Theorem 1, along with four groups that happen to realize
them. For instance, setting C4 = ⟨x⟩= ⟨i⟩one verifies that all elements a in Q8 \ C4
induce the same extension type (C4, 2, ϕ2, x2). On the other hand, by Lemma 1(a),
every group G of order eight with C4 ◁G must be isomorphic to one of the four
groups in Theorem 1. Hence, provided K8, D8, C8, and Q8 are mutually nonisomorphic, there are exactly four groups G of order eight that are not isomorphic to (C2)3.
Looking at the number of elements of order two, four, and eight in each group shows
that K8, D8, C8, and Q8 are indeed mutually nonisomorphic. This establishes Theorem 1.
The proof of Theorem 2 proceeds along the same lines but with two obstacles. First,
a group G ≄ (C2)4 of order sixteen need not have a subgroup C8. But if it hasn't, then
K8 turns out to be a decent substitute (Lemma 2). Second, in the context of Theorem 2
it is unclear whether the extension types derived in Lemma 3, aided by Lemma 1, can
actually be realized. That problem will be dealt with in section 4. The isomorphism
problem is handled in section 5.
Lemma 2. If G is a group of order sixteen that is not isomorphic to C2 × C2 × C2 ×
C2 = (C2)4, then either C8 ◁G or K8 ◁G.

Proof. We assume that G has no element of order eight and show that K8 occurs as a
subgroup of G. By assumption G ≄ (C2)4, so Fact 2 guarantees that there are elements
of order four in G. By Fact 6 we can fix an element z of order two in Z(G) and write
H = ⟨z⟩. Clearly H ◁G. We consider two cases.
Case 1: There is an element x in G of order four with x2 ≠ z. Then ⟨x⟩∩H = {e},
so ⟨x, z⟩is K8 by Fact 1.
Case 2: All elements x in G of order four have x2 = z. Then all elements of G/H
have order at most two, so G/H is Abelian by Fact 2. Now let x have order four. Since
G/H is Abelian, all conjugates of x lie in the coset Hx. Thus | class(x)| <=2, so in light
of Fact 5 the centralizer C = C(x) has order at least eight. It follows that there exists
y in C with y ∉⟨x⟩. If o(y) = 2, then ⟨x, y⟩= K8. If o(y) = 4, then y2 = z, whence
(xy)2 = x2y2 = zz = e and o(xy) <=2. If o(xy) = 1, then y = x-1 ∈⟨x⟩, which is
not the case. Thus xy is an element of order two that commutes with x. Therefore,
provided xy is not a member of ⟨x⟩, we are done. Fortunately the assumption that xy
belongs to ⟨x⟩implies that xy = x2, which delivers the contradiction y = x.
Lemma 3. Each group G of order sixteen that is not isomorphic to (C2)4 realizes one
of the extension types listed in Theorem 2 (but possibly not every extension type in
Theorem 2 is realized).
Proof. In the proof of Theorem 1 we saw that there are six extension types (C4, 2, τ, v).
Similarly one argues, using Fact 3 (respectively, Fact 4) that there are sixteen extension types (C8, 2, τ, v) and thirty-two extension types (K8, 2, τ, v). By Lemma 2 each
group G ≄ (C2)4 of order 16 realizes (up to equivalence) at least one of these 16 + 32
extension types. Observe that some of the forty-eight extension types may be equivalent to each other, and some a priori not realizable at all. Lemma 3 asserts that, in any
case, each G realizes one of the merely thirteen extension types listed in Theorem 2.
Putting C8 = ⟨x⟩we first derive the six extension types (C8, 2, τ, v) by looking at
the minimal order of an inducing element a in G \ C8. In the sequel v = a2 and τ is
the restriction to C8 of the conjugation map ta. The breakdown into six cases goes as
follows.
Case 1: o(a) = 2. Then v = e. By Fact 3 all φi in Aut(C8) satisfy (1) and (3). Thus
we get the extension types (C8, 2, φi, e) (1 <=i <=4). Henceforth we may assume that
o(b) >=4 for all b in G \ C8, since otherwise we are back to case 1.
Case 2: o(a) = 4. Here v = x4. If τ = φ2, then (xa)(xa) = xφ2(x)a2 = xx3a2 = e
by (4), so o(xa) = 2 contrary to our assumption. Similarly, if τ is φ1 or φ3, then
o(x2a) = 2. Thus at most (C8, 2, φ4, x4) is a new extension type.
Case 3: o(a) = 8. In this situation v = x2 or v = x6. Either way τ(v) = v occurs only
for τ in S = {φ1, φ3}. Let v = x2. Then o(x3a) = 2 for τ = φ1, and o(xa) = 2 for
τ = φ3. If v = x6, then by Lemma 1(b) the same groups arise since x6 is automorphic
to x2.
Case 4: o(a) = 16. Then G ≃C16 which, for instance, realizes the extension type
(C8, 2, φ1, x).
We now derive the seven extension types (K8, 2, τ, v), where
K8 = {e, x, x2, x3, y, xy, x2y, x3y}

as usual. By the previous discussion we may assume that o(z) < 8 holds for all z in G.
By Fact 4 we have Aut(K8) = {ψ1, · · · , ψ8} and the τ with τ 2 = id are the elements of
the conjugacy classes {ψ1}, {ψ3}, {ψ5, ψ7}, and {ψ6, ψ8}. We proceed again according
to the minimal order of an inducing element a in G \ K8 and put v = a2. Here τ is the
restriction of ta to K8.
Case 5: o(a) = 2. Then v = e is characteristic, so by Lemma 1(c) it suffices to consider any representatives of the conjugacy classes just indicated. Thus we get the extension types (K8, 2, ψi, e) with (say) i = 1, 3, 5, or 6.
Case 6: o(a) = 4. In this instance v is one of x2, y, or x2y. In view of case 5 we may
assume that o(b) >=4 for all b in G \ K8. We consider three subcases.
i. v = x2. Since v is characteristic it suffices again to focus on ψ1, ψ3, ψ5, and ψ6.
If τ = ψ1, then o(xa) = 2, while if τ = ψ6, then o(xya) = 2. Thus we are left
with (K8, 2, ψ3, x2) and (K8, 2, ψ5, x2).
ii. v = y. Because we must have τ(v) = v only τ = ψ1, ψ3, ψ5, or ψ7 qualifies. If
τ = ψ7, then o(xa) = 2. If τ = ψ5, then
(xa)(xa) = xψ5(x)a2 = x(xy)y = x2,
so putting a = xa we are back in subcase (i). If τ = ψ3, then ax2a-1 =
ψ3(x2) = x2, so a and x2 commute, whence
N := ⟨a, x2⟩= {e, a, y, ya, x2, x2a, x2y, x2ya}
is isomorphic to K8 = ⟨x, y⟩with y being the unique characteristic nonidentity
element of N (Fact 1). Since
(xa)(xa) = xψ3(x)a2 = x(x3)y = y,
setting a = xa ∉N brings us back to subcase (i) again. Therefore we are left
with (K8, 2, ψ1, y).
iii. v = x2y. Because we must have τ(v) = v, only the mappings τ in S =
{ψ1, ψ3, ψ5, ψ7} qualify. Because v is automorphic to y by Fact 4, and because S is a union of conjugacy classes, Lemma 1(b) predicts that we end up
with the same groups as in subcase (ii).

## 4. THE BREATH OF LIFE. 
Here we give life to the extension types listed in Theorem 2. Thus we show that each extension type is actually realized by some group.
We do so in two ways: first, by constructing permutation groups that do the job (the
pedestrian approach); second, by appealing to the cyclic extension theorem (the proof
of which, however, is omitted).
As to the first approach, say there is a group G2 of extension type (C8, 2, φ2, e).
Then its elements are e, x, x2, · · · , x7, a, xa, · · · , x7a, and according to (4) the multiplication is given by
(xkai)(xℓa j) =
{
xkx3ℓa
if i + j = 1,
xkx3ℓ
otherwise.
(5)
We emphasize that we cannot conversely simply take a sixteen-element set, label its
elements xi and xia (0 <=i <=7), and define an operation by (5) because who assures us
of associativity?1 Rather, recall that the Cayley representation of an arbitrary group G
1That person is Otto H¨older, but be patient: we are still pedestrians.

of order m assigns to g in G the permutation ρg in Sm defined by ρg(z) = zg. Here Sm
is the symmetric group on the set G. If one composes permutations from left to right,
then ρg ◦ρh = ρgh. Applying the Cayley representation to the generators x and a of
our hypothetical group G2 and using cycle notation for permutations yields
ρx = (e, x, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6, x7) (a, x3a, x6a, xa, x4a, x7a, x2a, x5a),
ρa = (e, a) (x, xa) (x2, x2a) (x3, x3a) (x4, x4a) (x5, x5a) (x6, x6a) (x7, x7a).
Relabelling puts these into more recognizable form, namely,
ξ = (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8) (9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16),
α = (1, 9) (2, 12) (3, 15) (4, 10) (5, 13) (6, 16) (7, 11) (8, 14)
Forgetting about the origin of the latter permutations, consider the subgroup
H = ⟨ξ, α⟩of S16. By calculation one verifies that αξα-1 = ξ 3, whence αξ kα-1 = (αξα-1)k = ξ 3k, so αξ k = ξ 3kα. Together with ξ 8 = α2 = id this implies that each
element of H can be written as ξ kαi with 0 <=k <=7 and 0 <=i <=1. For instance,
ξ 4αξ 7αξ 2α = ξ 4αξ 7ξ 6αα = ξ 4αξ 5 = ξ 4ξ 15α = ξ 3α.
We conclude that |H| <=16. On the other hand, again by brute-force calculation, one
sees that the sixteen pairs (k, i) yield different elements ξ kαi. Hence |H| = 16, and
it follows from α2 = e and αξα-1 = ξ 3 that α in H \ ⟨ξ⟩induces the extension type
(C8, 2, φ2, e).
Remarkably, each extension type (N, n, τ, v) can be realized by a group of permutations crafted in analogous fashion (this provides nice exercises for students). That
this method always succeeds is a consequence of Cayley's theorem in tandem with the
following result:
Theorem 3 (Cyclic Extension Theorem). Each extension type (N, n, τ, v) is realized by a suitable group G.
The elements of G are the ordered pairs (x, ai) with x in N and 0 <=i < n. Here a
is just a symbol. Define a binary operation as follows:
(x, ai) ∗(y, a j) =
{
(xτ i(y), ai+ j)       if i + j < n,
(xτ i(y)v, ai+ j-n)    if i + j >=n.
(6)
This definition is reminiscent of (4), yet it now becomes a nontrivial matter to establish
the associativity of ∗(see the remarks in section 6)! This group G of ordered pairs
is sometimes called an outer cyclic extension of N, as opposed to the inner cyclic
extensions discussed in section 3. Once G is established as group one usually writes
a for (e, a), v for (v, e), and generally xai for (x, ai). Note that τ now coincides with
the restriction of x ↦→axa-1 to N.
Let us look at some special cases. Setting Cn = ⟨a⟩one has v = e if and only
if N ∩Cn = {e}. In this case (6) defines a so-called semidirect product N
τ⋊Cn. If
additionally τ = id, then (6) boils down to the familiar direct product N × Cn. We
write G = N ⋊Cn if (up to isomorphism) G is the only proper semidirect product of
N and Cn, meaning the only one besides N × Cn. If G = N
τ⋊Cn with N = Cm, then

we write G = Cm
k⋊Cn. Here k is defined by the fact that τ is the map z ↦ z^k of Cm
to itself.
All our Gi (1 <=i <=13) were constructed as cyclic extensions of C8 or K8
but, once found, most of them admit simpler descriptions. For instance, G13 contains the subgroups H1 = ⟨x⟩and H2 = ⟨a⟩= {a, y, ya, e}, where xa = ax. Thus
G13 ≃H1 × H2 = C4 × C4 by Fact 1. Similarly xy = yx and ay = ya in G11, so
G11 ≃⟨x, a⟩× ⟨y⟩. Because ⟨x, a⟩, via the inducing element a, realizes the extension type (⟨x⟩, 2, ϕ2, x2) that is listed next to Q8 in Theorem 1, one concludes that
G11 ≃Q8 × C2. Similarly G10 contains the subgroup ⟨x, ya⟩≃Q8 that is disjoint
from ⟨y⟩≃C2. Thus G10 ≃Q8
τ⋊C2, which turns out to be the only proper semidirect
product of Q8 and C2 without elements of order eight. Further
G9 ≃⟨y, a⟩
τ⋊⟨x⟩= K4
τ⋊C4,
where τ(y) = y and τ(a) = ya. Because all order two elements σ of Aut(K4) ≃S3
are conjugate, they yield isomorphic semidirect products K4
σ⋊C4 by Lemma 1(c).
Hence the notation G9 = K4 ⋊C4. We leave it to the reader to verify the other entries
in the second column of Theorem 2. Notice that D16 = C8
7⋊C2 is a dihedral, SD16 =
C8
3⋊C2 a semi-dihedral, and Q16 is a generalized quaternion group, the second of an
infinite family Q2n (n >=3).

## 5. THE ISOMORPHISM PROBLEM. 
By Lemma 1(a) and Theorem 3 equivalent
extension types are always realized by isomorphic groups. Unfortunately inequivalent
extension types (N, n, τ, v) and (N ′, n, σ, w) may sometimes be realized by isomorphic groups G and G′ as well. (This happens if and only if each isomorphism Φ: G ∼→ G′ either has Φ(v) = w or (Φ|N) ◦τ ◦(Φ|N)-1 = σ; the group G = G′ = K8
in Theorem 1 is a case in point.) This cumbersome situation is referred to as the isomorphism problem. One way to prove that two groups are not isomorphic is to show
that one has more elements of a certain order than the other. Thus, we consider first
the orders of all elements of our groups:
Table 1. Element orders for groups G1--G13
```
       x  x2  x3  x4  x5  x6  x7   a  xa  x2a  x3a  x4a  x5a  x6a  x7a
G1
G2
G3
G4
G5
G6
       x  x2  x3  y  xy  x2y  x3y   a  xa  x2a  x3a  ya  xya  x2ya  x3ya
G7
G8
G9
G10
G11
G12
G13
```

All nonidentity elements of G0 = (C2)4 have order 2, so G0 is certainly not isomorphic to any other Gi. Counting the number of elements of order two, four, eight, and
sixteen, respectively, it follows that among G1, . . . , G6 at most G1 ≃G3 could occur.
But that's impossible since one is Abelian and the other is not. Because of the number
of elements of order eight, no Gi (1 <=i <=6) is isomorphic to any G j (7 <=j <=13).
As to the second set of groups, it remains to show that no two of G7, G9, and G10 are
isomorphic and that no two of G11, G12, and G13 are isomorphic. Now G7 is Abelian
but the non-Abelian G9 and G10 are more subtle to distinguish: in G9 the two subgroups {xa, x2y, x3ya, e} and {x, x2, x3, e} intersect trivially, whereas in G10 every
four-element subgroup contains x2 (exercise). Similarly G13 is Abelian but again the
non-Abelian G11 and G12 are harder to tell apart. Taking Q8 as {±1, ±i, ± j, ±k}
the center of G11 ≃Q8 × C2 is {(1, e), (1, a), (-1, e), (-1, a)} and contains only
one nonidentity square (-1, e) = (i, e)2. On the other hand, Z(G12) contains two nonidentity squares x2 and y = (xa)2.
Despite our focus on C8 and K8 = C4 × C2, a given group of order sixteen can of
course be a cyclic extension of (C2)3 or D8 or Q8 as well. Without proof, Table 2 gives
the cyclic extensions of the five groups of order eight:
Table 2.
```
G0
G1
G2
G3
G4
G5
G6
G7
G8
G9
G10
G11
G12
G13
C8
x
x
x
x
x
x
K8
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
C2 × C2 × C2
x
x
x
x
D8
x
x
x
x
Q8
x
x
x
x
```

## 6. HISTORICAL REMARKS. 
H¨older initiated the theory of group extensions in
his seminal article "Bildung zusammengesetzter Gruppen" [5], which featured the
cyclic extension theorem (i.e., Theorem 3, but somewhat disguised). The groups that
can be obtained from the trivial group by iteratively building cyclic extensions are
called solvable. Statistically speaking "most" groups are solvable. For instance, all
groups of order less than sixty are solvable. This pleasant state of affairs notwithstanding, Schreier, Artin, and others deemed it necessary to "extend" H¨older's extension
theory to noncyclic factor groups G/N. The prize is a barrage of technicalities that
rather obscures the essentials. Deplorably most texts on group theory that deal with
extension theory invert the arrow of history and mention Theorem 3 at most as a corollary of Artin-Schreier theory---that at a time when the novice has long since given up.
After this praise of the cyclic extension theorem, we should say a few words
about p-groups (i.e., groups whose order pe is a power of a prime p). According to
Sylow's main theorem each finite group G of cardinality n = p1^e1 ··· pk^ek contains a
subgroup Hi of order pi^ei for i = 1, 2, . . . , k, and the structure of the Hi determines
the structure of G to a large extent. Therefore it is important to classify p-groups.
The groups of order p3 and p4 were classified by H¨older [4] along with the groups of
order p2q and pqr. The groups of order 2n(n <=6) are given in [6]. More recently, the
classification of small groups has advanced tremendously through the work of Besche,
Eick, and O'Brien. Now at last humankind knows that there are 49,487,365,422 groups
of order 210, about seven for each human being. We recommend the survey article [2],
where one finds extensive historical background and a description of the construction
and enumeration algorithms. A table of the number of groups of order at most two thousand, and much more, can be found in [3]. (Exercise: How many of these numbers
were not known to H¨older?) One tenth of this table is reproduced here as Table 3.
Table 3.
```
+0  +1  +2  +3  +4  +5  +6  +7  +8  +9
0   2328    1543
```
We also mention [9], which contains the multiplication tables of all groups of order
thirty-two or less, along with further information such as the structure of the automorphism group, the lattice of subgroups, and the character table. No proofs are given
in [9]. The last column in Theorem 2 displays the notation used in [9].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT. I am grateful to the referee for enhancing the proof of Lemma 2 and for advancing
the cyclic extension theorem rather than generators and relations.
REFERENCES
1.
W. Burnside, Theory of Groups of Finite Order, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1911.
2.
H. U. Besche, B. Eick, and E. A. O'Brien, A millenium project: Constructing small groups, Internat. J.
Alg. and Comp. 12 (2002) 623--644.
3.
The small groups library, on the web at http://www-public.tu-bs.de:8080/˜hubesche/small.html
4.
O. H¨older, Die Gruppen der Ordnungen p3, pq2, pqr, p4, Math. Annalen 43 (1893) 301--412.
5.
O. H¨older, Bildung zusammengesetzter Gruppen, Math. Annalen 46 (1895) 321--422.
6.
M. Hall and K. Senior, The Groups of Order 2n (n <=6), Macmillan, New York, 1964.
7.
B. Huppert, Endliche Gruppen I, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1967.
8.
J. J. Rotman, An Introduction to the Theory of Groups, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1995.
9.
A. D. Thomas and G. V. Wood, Group Tables, Mathematics Series 2, Shiva Publishing Limited, Kent,
UK, 1980.
10.
B. L. van der Waerden, A History of Algebra, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1985.
11.
M. Wild, The asymptotic number of binary codes and binary matroids; available at http://www.arXiv.org/
abs/cs.IT/0408011.
MARCEL W. WILD received his Ph.D in 1987 from the University of Zurich and is now professor of mathematics at Stellenbosch University in sunny South Africa. His core research is in lattice theory, be it pure (e.g.,
the structure theory of finite modular lattices), or be it applied to such diverse fields as uncountably dimensional quadratic spaces, nonlinear image analysis, or the asymptotic number of inequivalent binary n-codes [11]. His
nonmathematical activities include reading popular accounts on colossal conundrums like quantum mechanics
or human consciousness, as well as listening to 70s progressive rock music. Readers who wish to discuss the
latter or know an elegant direct proof (not using Artin-Schreier theory) of H¨older's cyclic extension theorem
are welcome to send an email to M. Wild.
Department of Mathematics, Stellenbosch University, 7602 Matieland, South Africa
http://www.sun.ac.za/maths/MW/
mwild@sun.ac.za

---

### Algebra 1
When I first started algebra,
I never ever thought
that I had signed up
for a baby-sitting job.
Working with those signs
is like watching little kids.
I wish that I could put the signs
in jars and screw the lids.
The problem with those signs is,
like kids, they like to play.
Soon as I track down little x,
subtraction runs away.
And meanwhile, on the other side
of my graph paper,
cross-out lines have tied up
a baby integer.
Oh how I try to save her,
but was she 1 or 10?
Try as I might,
she won't be back again.
I really should start over,
but I've done a lot of work.
How painful it will be!
But I will not shirk.
I'll start fresh. I will do it,
though it will take long.
At least I will be certain that
the problem won't be wrong.
The good thing about algebra:
You get a second chance.
With kids, if you mess up,
there is no penitence.
------Submitted by Ben Yandell, Cal Tech; composed
by his (then) fourteen-year-old daughter Kate.
Tragically, Ben passed away of a heart attack
on August 25, 2004.